\input texinfo
@setfilename gnucobol.info
@settitle GnuCOBOL Manual
@setchapternewpage on
@footnotestyle end

@afourpaper

@include version.texi

@copying
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
@sp 1

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.
@sp 1
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end copying

@ifinfo
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* cobc: (gnucobol)Compile.      The GnuCOBOL compiler.
@end direntry
@dircategory COBOL
@direntry
* GnuCOBOL: (gnucobol).         A COBOL compiler
@end direntry
@dircategory GnuCOBOL
@direntry
* Overview: (gnucobol).         COBOL compiler overview.
@end direntry

@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GnuCOBOL Manual
@subtitle for GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION}
@author Keisuke Nishida, Roger While, Brian Tiffin, Simon Sobisch

Edition @value{EDITION} @*
Updated for GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION} @*
@value{UPDATED} @*

GnuCOBOL (formerly OpenCOBOL) is a free COBOL compiler and runtime.
@command{cobc} translates COBOL source to executable using intermediate C
together with a designated C compiler and linker.
@command{cobcrun} is a module loader to run generated modules,
@code{libcob} provides the necessary runtime.
@sp 2
This manual corresponds to GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION}.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002-2012, 2014-2024 Free Software Foundation, Inc.@*
Written by Keisuke Nishida, Roger While, Brian Tiffin, Simon Sobisch.

@insertcopying
@sp 2
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top

@ifinfo
Welcome to the GnuCOBOL @value{VERSION} manual.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Getting started::             Introduction to GnuCOBOL
* Compile::                     Compiling COBOL programs
* Customize::                   Customizing the compiler
* Optimize::                    Optimizing your program
* Debug::                       Debugging your program
* Encoding Handling::           Support different encoding according to literal type
* Profiling::                   Profiling your program
* Extensions::                  Non-standard extensions
* System Routines::             Additional routines
* Appendices::                  List of supported features and options,
                                Compiler and Runtime Configuration,
                                Documentation License
@ignore
* Index::                       Index
@end ignore


@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Getting started

* Hello world!::                Hello, world!

Compile

* Compiler options::            Compiler options
* Multiple sources::            Compiling multiple source files
* C interface::                 Dealing with C files

Compiler options

* Help options::                Help options
* Build target::                Build target
* Source format::               Source format
* Warning options::             Warning options
* Diagnostics options::         Diagnostics options
* Configuration options::       Configuration options
* Listing options::             Listing options
* Debug switches::              Debug switches
* Dependencies options::        Dependencies options
* Miscellaneous::               Miscellaneous

Multiple sources

* Static linking::              Compiling into a single executable
* Dynamic linking::             A main program and separate modules
* Building library::            Building a shared library
* Using library::               Using external libraries

C interface

* Main C program::              Writing main program in C
* Static C to COBOL::
* Dynamic C to COBOL::
* Static COBOL to C::
* Dynamic COBOL to C::

Customize

* Customizing compiler::        Customizing compiler
* Customizing library::         Customizing library

Optimize

* Optimize options::            How to enable optimization
* Optimize call::               Call subroutines efficiently
* Optimize binary::             Use efficient binary representation

Debug

* Debug options::               Debug options
* Debugger::                    Source Level Debugger
* Memory Dumps::                Memory Dumps
* Core Dumps::                  Core Dumps
* Trace::                       Tracing execution

Encoding handling

* Literal types and encodings:: Understanding different literal types
* Internal conversions::        How GnuCOBOL handles encoding conversions
* Source file encoding::        Handling different input scenarios
* Good Practices::              Best practices for encoding handling

Profiling
* Profiling options::           Profiling options
* Profiling results::           Profiling results

Extensions

* SELECT::                      SELECT ASSIGN TO.
* Indexed::                     Indexed file packages.
* Extended ACCEPT::             Extended ACCEPT statement.
* ACCEPT special::              ACCEPT special keys.
* Extended DISPLAY::            Extended DISPLAY statement.
* FUNCTION CONTENT-LENGTH::     Length of NUL byte terminated pointer data.
* FUNCTION CONTENT-OF::         Content of data at pointer, by length or NUL.

System Routines

* CBL_GC_GETOPT                 GETOPT for COBOL
* CBL_GC_HOSTED                 Access to C hosted variables
* CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP              Sleep for nanoseconds
* CBL_GC_FORK                   Fork the current COBOL process to a new one
* CBL_GC_WAITPID                Wait for a system process to end
* CBL_GC_WINDOW                 Multiple Window functions

Appendices

* Appendix A                    Compiler @command{cobc} options
* Appendix B                    Reserved Words
* Appendix C                    Intrinsic Functions
* Appendix D                    System routines
* Appendix E                    System names
* Appendix F                    Exception names
* Appendix G                    Compiler Configuration
* Appendix H                    Module loader @command{cobcrun} options
* Appendix I                    Runtime configuration
* Appendix J                    GNU Free Documentation License

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Getting started, Compile, Top, Top
@chapter Getting started

@menu
* Hello world!::                Hello, world!
@end menu

@node Hello world!
@section Hello, world!

This is a sample program that displays ``Hello, world!'':

@example
---- hello.cob -------------------------
      * Sample COBOL program
       IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
       PROGRAM-ID. hello.
       PROCEDURE DIVISION.
           DISPLAY "Hello, world!".
           STOP RUN.
----------------------------------------
@end example

@*The compiler, @command{cobc}, is executed as follows:

@example
$ cobc -x hello.cob
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

@*The executable file name (@file{hello} in this case) is
determined by removing the extension from the source file name.

@*You can specify the executable file name by specifying the compiler
option @option{-o} as follows:

@example
$ cobc -x -o hello-world hello.cob
$ ./hello-world
Hello, world!
@end example

@*The program can be written in a more modern style, with free format code,
inline comments, the @code{GOBACK} verb and an optional @code{END-DISPLAY} terminator:

@example
---- hellonew.cob ----------------
*> Sample GnuCOBOL program
identification division.
program-id. hellonew.
procedure division.
display
   "Hello, new world!"
end-display
goback.
----------------------------------
@end example

To compile free-format code, you must use the compiler option @option{-free}.

@example
$ cobc -x -free hellonew.cob
$ ./hellonew
Hello, new world!
@end example

@node Compile, Customize, Getting started, Top
@chapter Compile
@cindex Invoking

This chapter describes how to compile COBOL programs using GnuCOBOL.

@menu
* Compiler options::            Compiler options
* Multiple sources::            Compiling multiple source files
* C interface::                 Dealing with C files
@end menu

@node Compiler options
@section Compiler options

The compiler @code{cobc} accepts the options described in this section.
The compiler arguments follow the general syntax @code{cobc @var{options}
@var{file} [@var{file} @dots{}]}.
A complete list of options can be displayed by using the option @option{--help}.

@menu
* Help options::                Help options
* Build target::                Build target
* Source format::               Source format
* Warning options::             Warning options
* Diagnostics options::         Diagnostics options
* Configuration options::       Configuration options
* Listing options::             Listing options
* Debug switches::              Debug switches
* Dependencies options::        Dependencies options
* Miscellaneous::               Miscellaneous
@end menu

@node Help options
@subsection Help options

The following switches display information about the compiler:

@table @code
@item --help, -h
Display help screen (@pxref{Appendix A}).
No further actions will be taken.

@item --version, -V
Display compiler version, author package date and executable build
date. No further actions will be taken.

@item -dumpversion
Display internal compiler version (plain string of numbers).
No further actions will be taken.

@item --info
Display build information along with the default and current compiler
configurations. No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@item --verbose, -v
Verbosely display the programs invoked during compilation and additional diagnostics. 
Use multiple times to increase the verbosity.

@item --list-reserved
Display reserved words (@pxref{Appendix B}).
A Yes/No output shows if the word is supported
@footnote{Support may be partial or complete.}, context sensitive and its aliases.
The given options for reserved words specified for example by
option @option{-std=@var{dialect}} will be taken into account.
No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@item --list-intrinsics
Display intrinsic functions (@pxref{Appendix C}).
A Y/N field shows if the function is implemented.
No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@item --list-system
Display system routines (@pxref{Appendix D}).
No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@item --list-mnemonics
Display mnemonic names (@pxref{Appendix E}).
No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@item --list-exceptions
Display exception names (@pxref{Appendix F}).
No further actions will be taken except for further display options.

@end table

@node Build target
@subsection Build target

The compiler @command{cobc} treats files like @file{*.cob}, @file{*.cbl} as
COBOL source code, @file{*.c} as C source code, @file{*.o} as
object code, @file{*.i} as preprocessed code and @file{*.so}
as dynamic modules and knows how to handle such files in the generation,
compilation, and linking steps.

The special input name @file{-} takes input from @file{stdin} which is
assumed to be COBOL source, and uses a default output name of
@file{a.out} (or @file{a.so/c/o/i}, selected as appropriate) for the build type.

You may also use @file{-} as output name for the listing file or the preprocessor
result, for example with @code{cobc -t - prog.cob} / @code{cobc -P- prog.cob}.

By default, the compiler builds a dynamically loadable module.

The following options specify the target type produced by the compiler:

@table @code
@item -E
Preprocess only: compiler directives are executed, comment lines are
removed, and @code{COPY} and @code{REPLACE} statements are performed.
The output is sent to stdout, allowing you to directly use it as input for
another process. You can manually set an output file using @option{-o}.

@item --copy @var{copybook}
Include @file{copybook} at the beginning of the source code, as if
@code{COPY copybook} had been parsed.

@item --include @var{file.h}
Add a @code{#include} @file{file.h} at the beginning of the generated
C source file. The file name is put into quotes, unless it starts by
@code{<}. Quoted files should be absolute paths, since C files are compiled
in temporary directories.
The option also implies @option{-fno-gen-c-decl-static-call}.
This option can be used to check function prototypes when
static calls are used. When this option is used, the source file is
compiled in the project directory (instead of the temp directory), and
no prototypes are generated, so ALL static call functions must appear
in the header file, with GnuCOBOL compatible types.

@item -C
Translation only.  COBOL source files are translated into C files.
The output is saved in file @file{*.c}.

@item --save-temps
Normal compilation with additional storing the preprocessed files as @file{*.i}
and the translated C files as file @file{*.c}.

@item -S
Compile only.  Translated C files are compiled by the C compiler
to assembler code. The output is saved in file @file{*.s}.

@item -c
Compile and assemble.  This is equivalent to @code{cc -c}.
The output is saved in file @file{*.o}.

@item -m
Compile, assemble, and build a dynamically loadable module (i.e.,
a shared library). The output is saved in file @file{*.so}.
@footnote{The extension varies depending on your host.}
This is the default behaviour.

@item -b
Compile, assemble, and combine all input files into a single
dynamically loadable module.  Unless @option{-o} is also used,
the output is saved using the first filename as @file{*.so}.

@item -x
Include the main function in the output, creating an executable
image.  The main entry point being the first program in the file.

This option takes effect at the translation stage.
If you give this option with @option{-C}, you will see the main
function at the end of the generated C file.

@item -j, -job, -j=@var{args}, -job=@var{args}
Run job after compilation.  Either from executable with @option{-x}, or with
@command{cobcrun} when compiling a module.  Optional arguments @var{args},
if given, are passed to the program or module command line.

@item -I @var{directory}
Add @var{directory} to copy/include search path.

@item -L @var{directory}
Add @var{directory} to library search path.

@item -l @var{lib}
Link the library @var{lib}.

@item -D @var{define}
Pass @var{define} to the COBOL compiler.

@item -o @var{file}
Place the output into @var{file}.

@end table

@node Source format
@subsection Source format

GnuCOBOL supports fixed, free, Micro Focus' Variable, X/Open Free-form,
ICOBOL xCard and Free-form, ACUCOBOL-GT Terminal, and COBOLX source
formats.  By default, the compiler tries to autodetect the format using
the indicator on the first line, using the fixed format for correct
indicators and the free format for incorrect ones.  This can be
overridden either by the @code{>>SOURCE [FORMAT] [IS]
@{FIXED|FREE|COBOL85|VARIABLE|XOPEN|XCARD|CRT|TERMINAL|COBOLX|AUTO@}}
directive, or by one of the following options:

@table @code
@item -free, -F, -fformat=free
Free format.  The program-text area starts in column 1 and
continues till the end of line (effectively 255 characters
in GnuCOBOL).

@item -fixed, -fformat=fixed
Fixed format.  Source code is divided into: columns 1-6, the sequence
number area; column 7, the indicator area; columns 8-72, the program-text
area; and columns 72-80 as the reference area.@footnote{Historically, fixed
format was based on 80-character punch cards.}

@item -fformat=cobol85
Fixed format with enforcements on the use of Area A.

@item -fformat=variable
Micro Focus' Variable format.  Identical to the fixed format above
except for the program-text area which extends up to column 250 instead
of 72.

@item -fformat=xcard
ICOBOL xCard format.  Variable format with right margin set at column
255 instead of 250.

@item -fformat=xopen
X/Open Free-form format.  The program-text area may start in column 1
unless an indicator is present, and lines may contain up to 255
characters.  Indicator for debugging lines is @samp{D } (D followed by
a space) instead of @samp{D} or @samp{d}.

@item -fformat=crt
ICOBOL Free-form format (CRT).  Similar to the X/Open format above, with
lines containing up to 320 characters and single-character debugging
line indicators (@samp{D} or @samp{d}).

@item -fformat=terminal
ACUCOBOL-GT Terminal format.  Similar to the CRT format above, with
indicator for debugging lines being @samp{\D} instead of @samp{D} or
@samp{d}.  This format is mostly compatible with VAX COBOL terminal
source format.

@item -fformat=cobolx
COBOLX format.  This format is similar to the CRT format above, except
that the indicator area is always present in column 1; the program-text
area starts in column 2 and extends up to the end of the record.  Lines
may contain up to 255 characters.

@item -fformat=auto
Autodetection of format.  The compiler will use the first line of the file
to detect whether the file is in fixed format (with a correct indicator
at position 7), or in free format.

@end table

Note that with source formats @code{XOPEN}, @code{CRT}, @code{TERMINAL},
and @code{COBOLX}, missing spaces are not inserted within continued
alphanumeric literals that are truncated before the right margin.

@emph{Area A} denotes the source code that spans between margin A and
margin B, and Area B spans from the latter to the end of the record.
@emph{Area A enforcement} checks the contents of Area A, and reports any
item that does not belong to the correct Area: this feature helps in
developping COBOL programs that are portable to actual mainframe
environments.

In general, division, section, and paragraph names must start in Area A.
In the @code{DATA DIVISION}, level numbers @samp{01} and @samp{77}, must
also start in Area A.  In the @code{PROCEDURE DIVISION}s, statements and
separator periods must fit within Area B.  Every source format listed
above may be subject to Area A enforcement, except @code{FIXED},
@code{FREE}, and @code{XOPEN}.

Note that Area A enforcement enables recovery from missing periods
between paragraphs and sections.

@node Warning options

@subsection Warning options
Warnings are diagnostic messages that report constructions that are not inherently
erroneous but that are risky or suggest there may have been an error.

The following options do not enable specific warnings but control the kinds of
diagnostics produced by @command{cobc}.

@table @code
@item -fsyntax-only
Check Check the code for syntax errors, but donâ€™t do anything beyond that.

@item -fmax-errors=@var{n}
Limits the maximum number of error messages to @var{n}, at which point @command{cobc}
bails out rather than attempting to continue processing the source code.
If @var{n} is 0, there is no limit on the number of error messages produced.
If @option{-Wfatal-errors} is also specified, then @option{-Wfatal-errors} takes
precedence over this option.

@item -w
Inhibit all warning messages.

@item -Werror
Make all warnings into errors.

@item -Werror=@var{warning}
Make the specified @var{warning} into an error. The specifier for a warning is
appended; for example @option{-Werror=obsolete} turns the warnings controlled by
@option{-Wobsolete} into errors. This switch takes a negative form, to be used to
negate @option{-Werror} for specific warnings; for example
@option{-Wno-error=obsolete} makes @option{-Wobsolete} warnings not be errors,
even when @option{-Werror} is in effect.

The warning message for each controllable warning includes the option that controls
the warning. That option can then be used with @option{-Werror=} and
@option{-Wno-error=} as described above. (Printing of the option in the warning
message can be disabled using the @option{-fno-diagnostics-show-option} flag.)

Note that specifying @option{-Werror=foo} automatically implies @option{-Wfoo}.
However, @option{-Wno-error=foo} does not imply anything.

@item -Wfatal-errors

This option causes the compiler to abort compilation on the first error occurred
rather than trying to keep going and printing further error messages.

@end table
@*
You can request many specific warnings with options beginning with @samp{-W},
for example @option{-Wimplicit-define} to request warnings on implicit declarations.
Each of these specific warning options also has a negative form beginning
@samp{-Wno} to turn off warnings; for example, @option{-Wno-implicit-define}.
This manual lists only one of the two forms, whichever is not the default.

Some options, such as @option{-Wall} and @option{-Wextra}, turn on other options,
such as @option{-Wtruncate}. The combined effect of positive and negative forms is
that more specific options have priority over less specific ones, independently of
their position in the command-line. For options of the same specificity, the last
one takes effect.

@ignore
@comment{TODO - add in cobc this way, ideally until GC 3.1 is out...}
When an unrecognized warning option is requested (e.g., @option{-Wunknown-warning}),
@command{cobc} emits a diagnostic stating that the option is not recognized,
as long as the verbose mode @option{--verbose} is active.

@comment{TODO - add in cobc this way}
However, if the @option{-Wno-} form is used, the behavior is slightly different: no
diagnostic is produced for @option{-Wno-unknown-warning} unless other diagnostics
are being produced. This allows the use of new @option{-Wno-} options with old
compilers, but if something goes wrong, the compiler warns that an unrecognized
option is present.
@end ignore

@table @code
@item -Wall
Enable all the warnings about constructions that some users consider questionable,
and that are easy to avoid (or modify to prevent the warning).@*
The list of warning flags turned on by this option is shown in @option{--help}.

@item -Wextra, -W
Enable every possible warning that is not dialect specific.  This includes more
information than @option{-Wall} would normally provide.@*
(This option used to be called @option{-W}. The older name is still supported,
but the newer name is more descriptive.)

@item -W@var{warning}
Enable single warning @var{warning}.

@item -Wno-@var{warning}
Disable single warning @var{warning}.

@item -Warchaic
Warn if archaic features are used, such as continuation lines or the @code{NEXT SENTENCE} statement.

@item -Wcall-params
Warn if non-01/77-level items are used as arguments in a @code{CALL} statement.
This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wcolumn-overflow
Warn if text after column 72 in FIXED format. This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wconstant
@comment{TODO: Clarify!}
Warn inconsistent constant

@item -Wimplicit-define
Warn if implicitly defined data items are used.

@item -Wlinkage
@comment{TODO: Define "dangling".}
Warn dangling @code{LINKAGE} items. This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wobsolete
Warn if obsolete features are used.

@item -Wparentheses
Warn about any lack of parentheses around @code{AND} within @code{OR}.

@item -Wredefinition
Warn about incompatible redefinitions of data items.

@item -Wstrict-typing
Warn about type mismatch strictly.

@item -Wterminator
Warn about the lack of scope terminator END-XXX. This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wtruncate
Warn on possible field truncation. This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wconstant-expression
@item -Wconstant-numlit-expression
Warn about expressions that always resolve to true/false and therefore lead to unreachable code.

@item -Wunreachable
Warn if statements are likely unreachable. This is @emph{not} set with @option{-Wall}.

@item -Wadditional
Enable warnings that don't have an own warning flag.
@end table

@node Diagnostics options
@subsection Diagnostics options

The compiler provides some options to tune the way errors and warnings
(diagnostics) are displayed to the user.

@table @code

@item -fdiagnostics-absolute-paths
Print absolute paths in diagnostics. This option can be useful if your editor is not able
to correctly locate relative paths in your project.

@item -fdiagnostics-plain-output
Make diagnostic output as plain as possible.

@item -fno-diagnostics-show-option
Suppress output of option that directly controls the diagnostic, on which
warnings should be displayed.

@item -fno-diagnostics-show-caret
Do not display source context on warning/error diagnostic. By default, diagnostics
contain an excerpt with two lines before and after the location.

@item -fno-diagnostics-show-line-numbers
Suppress display of line numbers in the source context in diagnostics

@end table

@node Configuration options
@subsection Configuration options

The compiler uses many dialect specific options. These may be set via a defined
dialect by @option{-std=}, a configuration file by @option{-conf=} or by using the
single dialect flags directly.

@xref{Appendix G, Compiler Configuration, Compiler Configuration}, and @file{config/*.conf}.

Note concerning the defined dialects: The GnuCOBOL compiler tries to limit both the
feature-set and reserved words to the specified compiler when the "strict" dialects
are used.
COBOL sources compiled with these dialects are therefore @emph{likely} to compile
with the specified compiler and vice versa: sources that were compiled on the
specified compiler should compile without any issues with GnuCOBOL.@*
With the "non-strict" dialects GnuCOBOL will activate the complete feature-set
where it doesn't directly conflict with the specified dialect, including reserved words.
COBOL sources compiled with these dialects therefore may work only with GnuCOBOL.
COBOL sources may need a change because of reserved words in GnuCOBOL, otherwise
offending words @var{word-1} and @var{word-2} may be removed by
@option{-fno-reserved=@var{word-1},@var{word-1}}.

The dialects COBOL-85, X/Open COBOL, @w{COBOL 2002} and @w{COBOL 2014} are always
"strict".

@table @code
@item -std=@var{dialect}
Compiler uses the given @var{dialect} to determine certain compiler features
and warnings.

@item -std=default
GnuCOBOL dialect, supporting many of the @w{COBOL 2002} and @w{COBOL 2014} features,
many extensions found in other dialects and its own feature-set

@item -std=cobol85
COBOL-85 without any extensions other than the amendment Intrinsic Function
Module (1989), source compiled with this dialect is likely to compile with
most COBOL compilers

@item -std=xopen
X/Open COBOL (based on COBOL-85) without any vendor extensions, source compiled
with this dialect is likely to compile with most COBOL compilers; will warn
items that "should not be used in a conforming @w{X/Open COBOL} source program"

@item -std=cobol2002, -std=cobol2014
@w{COBOL 2002} / @w{COBOL 2014} without any vendor extensions, use @option{-Warchaic}
and @option{-Wobsolete} if archaic/obsolete features should be flagged

@item -std=ibm-strict, -std=ibm
IBM compatible

@item -std=mvs-strict, -std=mvs
MVS compatible

@item -std=mf-strict, -std=mf
Micro Focus compatible

@item -std=bs2000-strict, -std=bs2000
BS2000 compatible

@item -std=acu-strict, -std=acu
ACUCOBOL-GT compatible

@item -std=rm-strict, -std=rm
RM/COBOL compatible

@item -std=realia-strict, -std=realia
CA Realia II compatible

@item -std=gcos-strict, -std=gcos
GCOS compatible

@item -freserved-words=@var{dialect}
Compiler uses the given @var{dialect} to determine the reserved words.

@item -conf=<file>
User-defined dialect configuration.

@item -febcdic-table=@var{cconv-table}/@var{file}
EBCDIC/ASCII translation table to use; either read from @var{file}, or one of
the existing @var{cconv-table} from the configuration directory (see @code{cobc --info})
which have a .ttbl extension, for example @option{-febcdic-table=alternate}.@*
See the @file{default.ttbl} file for detailed information about the format.

@end table

You can override each single configuration entry by using compiler configuration
options on the command line.

Examples:

@table @code
@item -frelax-syntax-checks
@item -frenames-uncommon-levels=warning
@item -fnot-reserved=CHAIN,SCREEN
@item -ftab-width=4
@end table
@xref{Appendix A, Compiler @command{cobc} options, Compiler @command{cobc} options}.

@node Listing options
@subsection Listing options

@table @code

@item -t=@var{file}
Generate and place the standard print listing into @file{@var{file}}.

@item -T=@var{file}
Generate and place a wide print listing into @file{*@var{file}}.

@item --tlines=@var{lines}
Specify lines per page in print listing, default = 55.
Set to zero for no additional page breaks.

@item -ftsymbols
Generate symbol table in listing.

@item -fno-theader
Suppress all headers from listing while keeping page breaks.
     
@item -fno-tmessages
Suppress warning and error summary from listing.

@item -fno-tsource
Suppress actual source from listing (for example to only produce the
cross-reference).

@item -P, -P@var{directory}, -P=@var{file}
Generate and place a preprocessed listing (old format) into @file{@var{filename}.lst},
@file{@var{directory}/@var{filename}.lst}, @file{@var{file}}.

@item -Xref
@item -X
Generate cross reference in the listing.

@end table

Here is an example program listing with the options @code{-t -ftsymbols}:

@smallexample
GnuCOBOL 3.0.0   test.cbl                   Mon May 14 10:23:45 2018  Page 0001

LINE    PG/LN  A...B...........................................................

000001         IDENTIFICATION   DIVISION.
000002         PROGRAM-ID.      prog.
000003         ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
000004         CONFIGURATION SECTION.
000005         DATA             DIVISION.
000006         WORKING-STORAGE  SECTION.
000007         COPY 'values.cpy'.
000001C        78  I   VALUE 20.
000002C        78  J   VALUE 5000.
000003C        78  M   VALUE 5.
000008         01  SETUP-REC.
000009             05  FL1       PIC X(04).
000010             05  FL2       PIC ZZZZZ.
000011             05  FL3       PIC 9(04).
000012             05  FL4       PIC 9(08) COMP.
000013             05  FL5       PIC 9(04) COMP-4.
000014             05  FL6       PIC Z,ZZZ.99.
000015             05  FL7       PIC S9(05) SIGN LEADING SEPARATE.
000016             05  FL8       PIC X(04).
000017             05  FL9 REDEFINES FL8 PIC 9(04).
000018             05  FLA.
000019                 10  FLB OCCURS I TIMES.
000020                     15  FLC PIC X(02).
000021                 10  FLD   PIC X(20).
000022             05  FLD1      PIC X(100).
000023             05  FLD2 OCCURS M TO J TIMES DEPENDING ON FL5.
000024                 10  FILLER PIC X(01).
000025             05  FLD3      PIC X(3).
000026             05  FLD4      PIC X(4).
000027         PROCEDURE        DIVISION.
000028             STOP RUN.
@end smallexample

The first part of the listing lists the program text.  If the program text is
a COPY the line number reflects the COPY line number and is appended with
a @samp{C}.

When the wide list option @option{-T} is specified, the @code{SEQUENCE}
columns (for fixed-form reference-format) are included in the listing.


The second part of the listing file is the listing of the Symbol Table:

@smallexample
GnuCOBOL 3.0.0   test.cbl                   Mon May 14 10:23:45 2018  Page 0002

SIZE TYPE           LVL  NAME                           PICTURE

5204 GROUP          01   SETUP-REC
0004 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL1                          X(04)
0005 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL2                          ZZZZZ
0004 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL3                          9(04)
0004 NUMERIC        05     FL4                          9(08) COMP
0002 NUMERIC        05     FL5                          9(04) COMP
0008 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL6                          Z,ZZZ.99
0006 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL7                          S9(05)
0004 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FL8                          X(04)
0004 ALPHANUMERIC-R 05     FL9                          9(04)
0060 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FLA
0040 ALPHANUMERIC   10       FLB                        OCCURS 20
0002 ALPHANUMERIC   15         FLC                      X(02)
0020 ALPHANUMERIC   10       FLD                        X(20)
0100 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FLD1                         X(100)
5000 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FLD2                         OCCURS 5 TO 5000
0001 ALPHANUMERIC   10       FILLER                     X(01)
0003 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FLD3                         X(3)
0004 ALPHANUMERIC   05     FLD4                         X(4)
@end smallexample

If the symbol redefines another variable the @code{TYPE} is marked with @samp{R}.
If the symbol is an array the @code{OCCURS} phrase is in the @code{PICTURE} field.


The last part of the listing file is the summary of warnings an error in the
compilation group:

@example
0 warnings in compilation group
2 errors in compilation group
@end example

@node Debug switches
@subsection Debug switches

@table @code

@item -g
Produce C debugging information in the output.

@item --debug, -d
Enable all run-time error checks.

@item -fmemory-check=scope
Enable checking of internal storage during CALL (implied by @option{--debug}.

@item -fec=exception-name, -fno=ec=exception-name
Enable/disable specified exception checks,
@pxref{Appendix F, Exception Names, Exception Names};
@option{--debug} implies @option{-fec=ALL}.

@item -fsource-location
Generate source location code (implied by @option{--debug}, @option{-fdump} and
@option{-fec}).

@item -fstack-check
Enable @code{PERFORM} stack checking (implied by @option{--debug} or @option{-g}).

@item -ftrace
Generate trace code (log executed procedures, if tracing is enabled).

@item -ftraceall
Generate trace code (log executed procedures and statements,
if tracing is enabled).

@item -fdebugging-line
Enable debugging lines (@samp{D} in indicator column; @samp{>>D} directive).

@item -O
Enable optimization of code size and execution speed.
See your C compiler documentation, for example @code{man gcc} for details.

@item -O2
Optimize even more.

@item -Os
Optimize for size. Optimizer will favour code size over execution speed.

@item -fnotrunc
Do not truncate binary fields according to PICTURE.

@end table

@node Dependencies options
@subsection Dependencies options

Dependencies are files containing the content included by @code{COPY}
statements. These options are usually used by build systems to extract
dependencies from COBOL files. The dependencies can then be used to
decide when a file should be recompiled or not.

@table @code

@item -M
Output dependency list in Makefile format on stdout. Stop after
preprocessing the file and do not generate any other files.

@item -MT <target>
Set/add target file used in dependency list

@item -MQ <target>
Same as -MT but with Makefile-quoting of the target

@item -MF <file>
Specify a filename <file> where to output dependencies

@item -MP
Create phony targets for all dependencies

@item -MG
Output missing dependencies without complaining

@item -MD
Output dependencies in .d files while compiling

@item -fcopybook-deps
Output dependencies as copybook names instead of file names

@end table

@node Miscellaneous
@subsection Miscellaneous
@table @code

@item -ext <extension>
@comment{TODO: Clarify}
Add default file extension.

@item -fintrinsics=[ALL|intrinsic function name(,name,...)]
Allow use of all or specific intrinsic functions without @code{FUNCTION}
keyword.

Note: defining this within your source with
@code{CONFIGURATION SECTION. REPOSITORY.} is preferred. 

@item -ffold-copy=LOWER
Fold @code{COPY} subject to lower case (default no transformation).

@item -ffold-copy=UPPER
Fold @code{COPY} subject to upper case (default no transformation).

@item -save-temps(=<dir>)
Save intermediate files (by default, in current directory).

@item -fimplicit-init
Do automatic initialization of the COBOL runtime system.

@end table

@node Multiple sources
@section Multiple sources

This section describes how to compile a program from multiple source files.

This section also describes how to build a shared library that can
be used by any COBOL program and how to use external libraries in
COBOL programs.

@menu
* Static linking::              Compiling into a single executable
* Dynamic linking::             A main program and separate modules
* Building library::            Building a shared library
* Using library::               Using external libraries
@end menu

@node Static linking
@subsection Static linking

The easiest way of combining multiple files is to compile them into a
single executable.

One way is to compile all the files in one command:

@example
$ cobc -x -o prog main.cob subr1.cob subr2.cob
@end example

Another way is to compile each file with the option @option{-c},
and link them at the end.
The top-level program must be compiled with the option @option{-x}.

@example
$ cobc -c subr1.cob
$ cobc -c subr2.cob
$ cobc -c -x main.cob
$ cobc -x -o prog main.o subr1.o subr2.o
@end example

You can link C routines as well using either method:

@example
$ cobc -o prog main.cob subrs.c
@end example

or
@example
$ cobc -c subrs.c
$ cobc -c -x main.cob
$ cobc -x -o prog main.o subrs.o
@end example

Any number of functions can be contained in a single C file.

The linked programs will be called dynamically; that is, the symbol
will be resolved at run time.  For example, the following COBOL
statement

@example
CALL "subr" USING X.
@end example

will be converted into equivalent C code like this:

@example
int (*func)() = cob_resolve("subr");
if (func != NULL)
  func (X);
@end example

With the compiler option @option{-fstatic-call}, more efficient code
will be generated:

@example
subr(X);
@end example

Please notice that this option only takes effect when the called program name
is in a literal (like @code{CALL "subr"}).  With a data name (like
@code{CALL SUBR}), the program is still called dynamically.

@node Dynamic linking
@subsection Dynamic linking

There are two methods to achieve this: a driver program, or compiling
the main program and subprograms separately.

@subsubsection Driver program

Compile all programs with the option @option{-m}:
@example
$ cobc -m main.cob subr.cob
@end example
This creates the shared object files @file{main.so} and @file{subr.so}.
@footnote{The extension used depends on your operating system.}

Before running the main program, install the module files in your
library directory:
@example
$ cp subr.so /your/cobol/lib
@end example
Set the runtime variable @code{COB_LIBRARY_PATH}
to your library directory, and run the main program:
@example
$ export COB_LIBRARY_PATH=/your/cobol/lib
@end example
(@emph{Please notice:} You may set the variable via a runtime configuration file,
@pxref{Appendix I, Runtime Configuration, Runtime Configuration}.
You may also set the variable to directly point to the directory
where you compiled the sources.)

Now execute your program:
@example
$ cobcrun main
@end example

@subsubsection Compiling programs separately

The main program is compiled as usual:
@example
$ cobc -x -o main main.cob
@end example

Subprograms are compiled with the option @option{-m}:
@example
$ cobc -m subr.cob
@end example
This creates a module file @file{subr.so}@footnote{The extension
used depends on your operating system.}.

Before running the main program, install the module files in your
library directory:
@example
$ cp subr.so /your/cobol/lib
@end example

Now, set the environment variable @env{COB_LIBRARY_PATH}
to your library directory, and run the main program:
@example
$ export COB_LIBRARY_PATH=/your/cobol/lib
$ ./main
@end example

@node Building library
@subsection Building library

You can build a shared library by combining multiple COBOL programs
and even C routines:

@example
$ cobc -c subr1.cob
$ cobc -c subr2.cob
$ cc -c subr3.c
$ cc -shared -o libsubrs.so subr1.o subr2.o subr3.o
@end example

@node Using library
@subsection Using library

You can use a shared library by linking it with your main program.

Before linking the library, install it in your system library directory:
@example
$ cp libsubrs.so /usr/lib
@end example
or install it somewhere else and set @code{LD_LIBRARY_PATH}:
@example
$ cp libsubrs.so /your/cobol/lib
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/your/cobol/lib
@end example

Then, compile the main program, linking the library as follows:
@example
$ cobc -x main.cob -L/your/cobol/lib -lsubrs
@end example

@node C interface
@section C interface

This chapter describes how to combine C programs with COBOL programs.

@menu
* Main C program::              Writing main program in C
* Static C to COBOL::
* Dynamic C to COBOL::
* Static COBOL to C::
* Dynamic COBOL to C::
* Interface functions for C::
* Loading translation tables::
@end menu

@node Main C program
@subsection Writing Main Program in C

Include @file{libcob.h} in your C program and call @code{cob_init} before
using any COBOL module.
Do a cleanup afterwards, either by calling @code{cob_stop_run} (if your
program should terminate) or by calling @code{cob_tidy} (if your program
should execute further on without any more COBOL calls).
Calling @code{cob_init}, one or several GnuCOBOL modules and then @code{cob_tidy}
in this sequence can be done multiple times).

@example
#include <libcob.h>

int
main (int argc, char **argv)
@{
  /* initialize your program */
  ...

  /* initialize the COBOL run-time library */
  cob_init (argc, argv);

  /* rest of your program */
  ...

  /* Clean up and terminate - This does not return */
  cob_stop_run (return_status);
@}
@end example

You can write @code{cobc_init(0, NULL);} if you do not want to pass
command line arguments to COBOL.

The easiest option to compile and/or link your C program is by passing
the work to @code{cobc} as follows:

@example
cobc -x main.c
@end example

possibly running in verbose mode to see what cobc does:

@example
cobc -x --verbose main.c   # using -x -v or -xv would be also possible
@end example

or with several steps:

@example
cobc -c main.c
cobc -x main.o
@end example

As an alternative you can use the @code{cob-config} tool to get the necessary
options to be passed to the C compiler / linker.

@example
cc -c @`{}cob-config --cflags@`{} main.c    # compile only
cc -o main main.o @`{}cob-config --libs@`{} # link only

@end example


@node Static C to COBOL
@subsection Static linking with COBOL programs

Let's call the following COBOL module from a C program:

@example
---- say.cob ---------------------------
       IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
       PROGRAM-ID. say.
       ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
       DATA DIVISION.
       LINKAGE SECTION.
       01 hello PIC X(7).
       01 world PIC X(6).
       PROCEDURE DIVISION USING hello world.
           DISPLAY hello world.
           GOBACK.
----------------------------------------
@end example

This program accepts two arguments, displays them, and exits.

From the viewpoint of C, this is equivalent to a function having the
following prototype:

@example
extern int say(char *hello, char *world);
@end example

So, your main program will look like as follows:

@example
---- hello.c ---------------------------
#include <libcob.h>

extern int say(char *hello, char *world);

int
main()
@{
  int ret;
  char hello[8] = "Hello, ";
  char world[7] = "world!";

  /* initialize the COBOL run-time library */
  cob_init(0, NULL);

  /* call the static module and store its return code */
  ret = say(hello, world);

  /* shutdown the COBOL run-time library, keep program running */
  (void)cob_tidy();

  return ret;
@}
----------------------------------------
@end example

Compile and run these programs as follows:

@example
$ cobc -x hello.c say.cob
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

or, more split and directly using the C compiler:

@example
$ cc -c `cob-config --cflags` hello.c
$ cobc -c -static say.cob
$ cobc -x -o hello hello.o say.o
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

Note: The biggest benefits of static linking are that all programs are verified to
be available in the resulting binary. Furthermore there is a slightly performance
benefit in this type of CALL (not visible for "normal" programs).


@node Dynamic C to COBOL
@subsection Dynamic linking with COBOL programs

You can find a COBOL module having a specific name by using the C
function @code{cob_resolve}, which takes the module name as a string
and returns a pointer to the module function.

@code{cob_resolve} returns @code{NULL} if there is no module.  In this case,
the function @code{cob_resolve_error} returns the error message.

Let's see an example:

@example
---- hello-dynamic.c -------------------
#include <libcob.h>

static int (*say)(char *hello, char *world);

int main()
@{
  int ret;
  char hello[8] = "Hello, ";
  char world[7] = "world!";

  /* initialize the COBOL run-time library */
  cob_init(0, NULL);

  /* Find the module with PROGRAM-ID "say". */
  say = cob_resolve("say");

  /* If there is no such module, show error and exit. */
  if(say == NULL) @{
    fprintf(stderr, "%s\n", cob_resolve_error());
    exit(1);
  @}

  /* Call the module found ... */
  ret = say(hello, world);

  /* ...and exit with the return code. */
  cob_stop_run(ret);
@}
----------------------------------------
@end example

Compile and run these programs as follows:

@example
$ cobc -x -o hello hello-dynamic.c
$ cobc -m say.cob
$ export COB_LIBRARY_PATH=.
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

The check of the module load as written above can be directly done in
libcob as follows:

@example
---- hello-dynamic2.c ------------------
#include <libcob.h>

int main()
@{
  int ret;
  char hello[8] = "Hello, ";
  char world[7] = "world!";

  void *cob_argv[2];
  cob_argv[0] = hello;
  cob_argv[1] = world;

  /* initialize the COBOL run-time library */
  cob_init(0, NULL);

  /* do a CALL, expecting the module to exist,
     otherwise exiting with an error. */
  ret = cob_call ("say", 2, cob_argv);

  /* ...and exit with the return code. */
  cob_stop_run(ret);
@}
----------------------------------------
@end example


In any case be aware that all errors that happen within COBOL will exit your
program, as same as a @code{STOP RUN} will do.

Depending on the application you possibly want to register C signal handlers;
error and/or exit handlers in C and/or COBOL to do cleanups, logging or anything else.

There is one way to handle all these scenarios with a call, too, using 
@code{cob_call_with_exception_check} instead of @code{cob_call} as follows:

@example
---- hello-dynamic3.c ------------------
#include <libcob.h>

int main()
@{
  int ret;
  char hello[8] = "Hello, ";
  char world[7] = "world!";

  void *cob_argv[2];
  cob_argv[0] = hello;
  cob_argv[1] = world;

  /* initialize the COBOL run-time library */
  cob_init(0, NULL);

  /* do a CALL, catching all possible results, */
  ret = cob_call_with_exception_check ("say", 2, cob_argv);

  switch (ret) @{
  case 0:  /* program coming back */

    /* Clean up and terminate runtime */
    cob_runtime_hint("program exited with return code %d",
       cob_last_exit_code ());
    cob_tidy ();
    break;

  case 1:  /* normal exit */
    cob_runtime_hint("STOP RUN with return code %d",
       cob_last_exit_code ());
    break;

  case -1:  /* error exit */
    cob_runtime_hint("error exit with return code %d and error \"%s\"",
       cob_last_exit_code (), cob_last_runtime_error ());
    break;

  case -2:  /* hard error exit */
    cob_runtime_hint("hard error exit with return code %d and error \"%s\"",
       cob_last_exit_code (), cob_last_runtime_error ());
    break;

  case -3:  /* signal handler  exit */
    cob_runtime_hint("signal handler exit with signal %d and error \"%s\"",
       cob_last_exit_code (), cob_last_runtime_error ());
    break;

  default:
    cob_runtime_hint("unexpected return from cob_call_with_exception_check,"
       " last exit code %d, last error \"%s\"",
       cob_last_exit_code (), cob_last_runtime_error ());
    break;
  @}

  /* ...and exit with zero if no error happened */
  exit(ret != 0 && ret != 1);
@}
----------------------------------------
@end example



@node Static COBOL to C
@subsection Static linking with C programs

Let's call the following C function from COBOL:

@example
---- say.c -----------------------------
int say(char *hello, char *world)
@{
  int i;
  for(i = 0; i < 7; i++)
    putchar(hello[i]);
  for(i = 0; i < 6; i++)
    putchar(world[i]);
  putchar('\n');
  return 0;
@}
----------------------------------------
@end example

This program is equivalent to the program in @file{say.cob} above.

Note that, unlike C, the arguments passed from COBOL programs are not
terminated by the null character (i.e., @samp{\0}).

You can call this function in the same way you call COBOL programs:

@example
---- hello.cob -------------------------
       IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
       PROGRAM-ID. hello.
       ENVIRONMENT DIVISION.
       DATA DIVISION.
       WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
       01 hello PIC X(7) VALUE "Hello, ".
       01 world PIC X(6) VALUE "world!".
       PROCEDURE DIVISION.
       CALL "say" USING hello world.
       STOP RUN.
----------------------------------------
@end example

Compile these programs as follows:

@example
$ cobc -x -o hello -static hello.cob say.c
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

or separate:

@example
$ cc -c say.c
$ cobc -c -static -x hello.cob
$ cobc -x -o hello hello.o say.o
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

@node Dynamic COBOL to C
@subsection Dynamic linking with C programs

You can create a dynamically-linked module from a C program by compiling
it with cobc ...

@example
$ cobc -m say.c
$ cobc -x hello.cob
$ export COB_LIBRARY_PATH=.
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

or with most C compilers by passing option @option{-shared} to the C compiler:

@example
$ cc -shared -o say.so say.c
$ cobc -x hello.cob
$ export COB_LIBRARY_PATH=.
$ ./hello
Hello, world!
@end example

Mind that for COBOL to be able to load the module via CALL the name of the binary
must either be identical to the CALL name or the binary containing the entry-point
must have been loaded before (by a previous call or COB_PRE_LOAD).

@node Interface functions for C
@subsection Redirecting output to a (FILE *)

From a module written in C you can call @code{cob_set_runtime_option}
to set the exact @code{(FILE *)} which is used to write trace data to.
In @file{common.h} is the following:
@smallexample
enum cob_runtime_option_switch @{
   COB_SET_RUNTIME_TRACE_FILE              /* 'p' is  FILE *  */
   COB_SET_RUNTIME_DISPLAY_PRINTER_FILE    /* 'p' is  FILE *  */
   COB_SET_RUNTIME_RESCAN_ENV              /* rescan environment variables */
   COB_SET_RUNTIME_DISPLAY_PUNCH_FILE      /* 'p' is  FILE *  */
@};
COB_EXT_IMPORT  void  cob_set_runtime_option   (enum cob_runtime_option_switch opt, void *p);
@end smallexample

So from you C code you can tell the GnuCOBOL runtime to redirect TRACE output by:
@example
cob_set_runtime_option (COB_SET_RUNTIME_TRACE_FILE,
                        (void*)((FILE*)myfd));
@end example

You could also redirect all @code{DISPLAY UPON PRINTER} output to a file by:
@example
cob_set_runtime_option (COB_SET_RUNTIME_DISPLAY_PRINTER_FILE, 
                        (void*)((FILE*)myfd));
@end example

You could also redirect all @code{DISPLAY UPON SYSPUNCH} output to a file by:
@example
cob_set_runtime_option (COB_SET_RUNTIME_DISPLAY_PUNCH_FILE,
                         (void*)((FILE*)myfd));
@end example

Another routine can be used to return the current value of the option.
@example
COB_EXT_IMPORT  void *
cob_get_runtime_option (enum cob_runtime_option_switch opt);
@end example

@node Loading translation tables
@subsection Loading EBCDIC/ASCII translation tables (collating sequences)

When an EBCDIC/ASCII translation table is needed (for instance when calling
sort functions), you can can call the @code{cob_load_collation} function to
retrieve such tables:
@example
COB_EXT_IMPORT int
cob_load_collation (const char *col_name,
                    cob_u8_t *ebcdic_to_ascii,
                    cob_u8_t *ascii_to_ebcdic)
@end example

@node Customize, Optimize, Compile, Top
@chapter Customize

@menu
* Customizing compiler::        Customizing compiler
* Customizing library::         Customizing library
@end menu

@node Customizing compiler
@section Customizing compiler

These settings are effective at compile-time.

Environment variables (default value in brackets):

@table @code
@item COB_CC
C compiler ("gcc")
@item COB_CFLAGS
Flags passed to the C compiler ("-I$(PREFIX)/include")
@item COB_LDFLAGS
Flags passed to the C compiler ("")
@item COB_LIBS
Standard libraries linked with the program ("-L$(PREFIX)/lib -lcob")
@item COB_LDADD
Additional libraries linked with the program ("")
@end table

@node Customizing library
@section Customizing library

These settings are effective at run-time. You can set them either via the
environment or by a runtime configuration file.

To set the global runtime configuration file export @code{COB_RUNTIME_CONFIG}
to point to your configuration file.
To set an explicit runtime configuration file for a single run via
@command{cobcrun} you can use its option @option{-c @var{file}},
@option{--config=@var{file}}.

For displaying the current runtime settings you can use the option
@option{-r}, @option{--runtime-env} of @command{cobcrun}.

For a complete list of runtime variables, aliases, their default values and options
to set them @pxref{Appendix I, Runtime Configuration, Runtime Configuration}.

@node Optimize, Debug, Customize, Top
@chapter Optimize

@menu
* Optimize options::            How to enable optimization
* Optimize call::               Call subroutines efficiently
* Optimize binary::             Use efficient binary representation
@end menu

@node Optimize options
@section Optimize options

There are five compiler options for optimization:
@option{-O0}, @option{-O}, @option{-Os}, @option{-O2}, @option{-O3}.
These options enable optimization at both translation
(from COBOL to C) and compilation (C to assembly) levels.

Currently, there is no difference between these optimization options at
the translation level other than @option{-O0} disabling constant folding of
expressions and disabling removement of unreachable code.

The option @option{-O}, @option{-Os} or @option{-O2} is passed to the
C compiler as is and used for C level optimization.

Additional the options @option{-fremove-unreachable} and  @option{-fconstant-folding}
may be used to adjust handling of these parts; note that constant-folding is a dialect
specific option and that both options have an effect on the detail of checks done
to unreachable code.

@node Optimize call
@section Optimize call

When a @code{CALL} statement is executed, the called program is linked at run
time.  By specifying the compiler option @option{-fstatic-call}, you can
statically link the program at compile time and call it efficiently.
(@pxref{Static linking})

@node Optimize binary
@section Optimize binary

By default, data items of usage binary or comp are stored in
big-endian form.  On those machines whose native byte order is
little-endian, this is not quite efficient.

If you prefer, you can store binary items in the native form of your
machine.  Set the config option @code{binary-byteorder} to
@code{native} in your config file (@pxref{Customize}).

In addition, setting the option @code{binary-size} to @code{2-4-8} or
@code{1-2-4-8} is more efficient than others.

@node Debug, Encoding Handling, Optimize, Top
@chapter Debug

@menu
* Debug options::               Debug options
* Debugger::                    Source Level Debugger
* Memory Dumps::                Memory Dumps
* Core Dumps::                  Core Dumps
* Trace::                       Tracing execution
@end menu

@node Debug options
@section Debug options

The compiler option @option{--debug} can be used, especially during the
development of your programs.  It enables all run-time error checking, such as
subscript boundary checks and numeric data checks, and leads to display of
run-time errors with source locations.
Exceptions may also be enabled/disabled separately.
@xref{Debug switches, Debug switches,,,}.

@node Debugger
@section Source Level Debugger
Compiling with @option{-g} enables several kinds of debug information, allowing
you to run your programs with the system debugger.
This allows you to step through the COBOL code and inspect the call stack,
but direct access to the COBOL variables is not available.
Different GDB frontends exist that provide access the COBOL variables directly.

Compiling with debug information also enables several tools to profile the code
or test it, for example against memory violations.

@comment Much more too add here, at least leaving teasers...

@node Memory Dumps
@section Memory Dumps
Memory Dumps can be enabled/disabled at runtime and will by default
be executed in case of runtime errors or handling of different signals.

They can also be requested via C interface.

Only modules that are explicit enabled for dump code will output their data.

@node Core Dumps
@section Core Dumps
By default GnuCOBOL catches signals that normally may create core-dumps.
To disable this or to even explicit raise SIGABRT on runtime errors or to
directly generate core-dumps through libcob, see the runtime varialbes
@code{COB_CORE_ON_ERROR} and @code{COB_CORE_FILENAME}.
To inspecting the reason for the abort check the content of the variable
@code{runtime_err_str} in the generated dump file.
@footnote{The usability of coredumps depends on your operating system.}

@node Trace
@section Tracing execution
Tracing program execution, either in general or in specific parts can be enabled.

@node Encoding Handling, Profiling, Debug, Top
@chapter Encoding Handling

This chapter describes the handling of GnuCOBOL to different encodings for literals according to the type of the literal

@menu
* Literal types and encodings::   Understanding different literal types
* Internal conversions::          How GnuCOBOL handles encoding conversions
* Source file encoding::          Handling different input scenarios
* Good Practices::                Best practices for encoding handling
@end menu

@node Literal types and encodings
@section Literal types and encodings

GnuCOBOL supports various types of literals with different internal encodings:

@itemize @bullet
@item Alphanumeric literals: Stored as ISO-8859-15
@itemize @minus
@item Ensures compatibility with legacy COBOL systems that rely on single-byte encodings
@item Optimized for storage and processing efficiency
@item Maintains COBOL's tradition of using single-byte character sets
@item Provides consistent performance for traditional string operations
@item Simplifies data alignment with byte sizing
@end itemize

@item National literals: Stored as UTF-16
@itemize @minus
@item Complies with the COBOL standard, supporting full Unicode
@item Fixed-width encoding aligns with COBOL's structured data handling requirements
@item Optimized for non-Latin scripts, likw Chinese, and Japanese
@item Compatible with systems that have been updated for Unicode support
@item Enhances performance for specific string operations involving multi-byte characters
@end itemize

@item UTF-8 literals: Stored as UTF-8
@itemize @minus
@item Logically stored as UTF-8 encoded characters, ensuring that the encoding remains consistent throughout processing
@item Variable-width encoding providing full support for Unicode
@item Facilitates integration with modern systems, ensuring that COBOL applications can interact with contemporary environments
@item Retains backward compatibility with ASCII
@end itemize
@end itemize

Here's an example demonstrating the different literal types:

@example
---- encoding_example.cob -------------------------

 IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
 PROGRAM-ID. encoding-example.
 DATA DIVISION.
 WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
 01 alphanumeric-var PIC X(10) VALUE "Hello".
 01 national-var PIC N(10) VALUE N"ã“ã‚“ã«ã¡ã¯".
 01 utf8-var PIC U(10) VALUE U"Ø£Ù‡Ù„Ø§".
 PROCEDURE DIVISION.
 DISPLAY "Alphanumeric: " alphanumeric-var.
 DISPLAY "National: " national-var.
 DISPLAY "UTF-8: " utf8-var.
 STOP RUN.

-------------------------------------------------
@end example


@node Internal conversions
@section Internal conversions

GnuCOBOL implements internal conversions to ensure proper handling of different literal types:

@itemize @bullet
@item Alphanumeric literals are read and stored as ISO-8859-15
@item UTF-8 literals are read and stored as UTF-8.
@item National literals are converted to and stored as UTF-16.
@end itemize

These conversions ensure compliance with the COBOL standard while optimizing storage and maintaining compatibility with legacy code.

@node Source file encoding
@section Source file encoding

GnuCOBOL addresses two main scenarios for source file encoding:

@enumerate
@item Single-byte encoded source files (e.g., ISO-8859-15):
@itemize @bullet
@item Alphanumeric literals are interpreted as ISO-8859-15
@item UTF-8 literals are converted to UTF-8
@item National literals are converted to UTF-16
@end itemize

@item UTF-8 encoded source files:
@itemize @bullet
@item Alphanumeric literals are converted to ISO-8859-15
@item UTF-8 literals are correctly interpreted
@item National literals are converted to UTF-16
@end itemize
@end enumerate

To specify the source file encoding, use the @option{-fsource-encode} compiler option:

@example
$ cobc -x -fsource-encode=ISO-8859-15 my_program.cob
@end example

This ensures that GnuCOBOL correctly interprets the source file and performs the necessary conversions for different literal types.

@strong{Note:} The conversion process described above fully works only if the system has the @code{iconv} library installed. If it is not available, National literals are converted manually by simply appending UTF-16 space characters. This may result in incorrect encoding for some characters.

@node Good Practices
@section Good Practices

When working with different encodings in GnuCOBOL, it's important to follow good practices to ensure your programs handle encoding correctly and consistently. Here are some recommended practices:
@enumerate
@item Understand the big picture:
GnuCOBOL supports various literal types (alphanumeric, national, UTF-8) with different internal encodings (ISO-8859-15, UTF-16, UTF-8). It automatically handles the necessary conversions to ensure compliance with the COBOL standard and maintain compatibility with legacy code.

@item Leverage automatic encoding detection:
GnuCOBOL will automatically detect the source file encoding in two ways:

@itemize @bullet
@item If the source file has a Byte Order Mark (BOM), GnuCOBOL will use that to determine the encoding.
@item If no BOM is present, GnuCOBOL will use the current locale setting to determine the source file encoding.
@end itemize

@item Specify the source encoding explicitly:
If you need to override the automatically detected source file encoding, you can use the @option{-fsource-encode} compiler option to specify the correct encoding:
@example
$ cobc -x -fsource-encode=ISO-8859-15 my_program.cob
@end example
This ensures GnuCOBOL correctly interprets the source file and performs the necessary conversions for different literal types.

@item Handle national literals carefully:
While GnuCOBOL automatically converts national literals to UTF-16, this conversion process relies on the availability of the iconv library. If iconv is not installed, national literals will be converted manually by appending UTF-16 space characters, which may result in incorrect encoding for some characters. Ensure iconv is available on your system for the best handling of national literals.

@end enumerate

By following these practices, you can ensure your GnuCOBOL programs correctly handle the various encoding scenarios they may encounter.

@exampleindent 0

@node Profiling, Extensions, Debug, Top
@chapter Profiling COBOL
@cindex Profiling
@cindex Profiling your program

@menu
* Profiling options::           Profiling options
* Profiling results::           Profiling results
@end menu

@node Profiling options
@section Profiling options

Profiling is enabled with the @code{-fprof} flag while compiling a
COBOL module. Only modules that have been compiled with profiling
enabled can be later profiled.

Then executing your program with @env{COB_PROF_ENABLE=1} will
automatically profile the module(s) and generate a CSV result file.
Note that physical @code{CANCEL} is disabled when profiling is
enabled, because some profiling information in the module needs to
remain available until the end of the program.

By default, this file is called
@code{cob-prof-<program-id>-<pid>.csv}, but this name can be
configured using @env{COB_PROF_FILE}.

Some environment variables (and the corresponding options in the
runtime configuration) can be used to tune the behavior of profiling
during execution: @code{COB_PROF_FILE}, @code{COB_PROF_ENABLE}
and @code{COB_PROF_MAX_DEPTH}, @code{COB_PROF_FORMAT}
@pxref{Appendix I, Runtime Configuration, Runtime Configuration} for
more information.


@node Profiling results
@section Profiling results
@cindex Profiling results
@cindex How to interpret the profiling results

By default, the generated CSV file has 8 columns for each line (it can
be customized with the @code{COB_PROF_FORMAT} environment/runtime
configuration):

@table @code

@item program-id

The program identifier of the module.

@item section

The name of the section. The time of a section is not computed
directly, but as the sum of the time spent in its paragraphs.

@item paragraph

The name of the paragraph. If a section has no paragraph, or does not
start with a paragraph, a default paragraph called
@code{MAIN PARAGRAPH} is created.

@item entry

The name of the entry for @code{ENTRY} statements, or the name of the
target for @code{CALL} statements. No time is associated with
@code{ENTRY} statements, as the time is directly included in the
including paragraph. However, the number of calls is still recorded.

@item location

The file and line number of the corresponding entry point (section or
paragraph)

@item kind

The kind is either @code{PROGRAM}, @code{SECTION}, @code{PARAGRAPH},
@code{CALL} or @code{ENTRY}.

@item time-ns

The time spent in the module/section/paragraph/call in nanoseconds

@item time

The time spent in the module/section/paragraph/call in a human
readable form (currently, the time in seconds and milliseconds)

@item ncalls

The number of calls to this section/paragraph

@end table

@node Extensions, System Routines, Profiling, Top
@chapter Non-standard extensions
@cindex Extensions
@cindex Non-standard extensions

@menu
* SELECT::                      @code{SELECT ASSIGN TO}.
* Indexed::                     Indexed file packages.
* Extended ACCEPT::             Extended @code{ACCEPT} statement.
* ACCEPT special::              @code{ACCEPT} special keys.
* Extended DISPLAY::            Extended @code{DISPLAY} statement.
* FUNCTION CONTENT-LENGTH::     Length of NUL byte terminated pointer data.
* FUNCTION CONTENT-OF::         Content of data at pointer, by length or NUL.
@end menu


@node SELECT
@section SELECT ASSIGN TO
@cindex @code{SELECT}
@cindex @code{SELECT ASSIGN TO}

A file may be assigned to a literal file, a file in a variable,
or a file in an environment variable.

@subsection Literal file.

Assign to a literal file.

@example
Select @var{file} assign to "/tmp/myfile.txt".
@end example


@subsection <variable>

Assign to a file which name is read from a variable.

@example
Select @var{file} assign to my-file.

01  my-file            pic x(512).

Move "/tmp/myfile.txt" to my-file.
Open output <file>.
@end example


@subsection <environment variable>

Assign to a file in an environment variable.

@example
export myfile=/tmp/myfile.txt

Select @var{file} assign to external myfile.
@end example


@node Indexed
@section Indexed file packages
@cindex Indexed
@cindex Indexed file packages

<This section is in progress.>


@node Extended ACCEPT
@section Extended ACCEPT statement
@cindex Extended @code{ACCEPT} statement

Extended @code{ACCEPT} statements allow for full control of items
accepted from the screen.
Items accept by line and column positioning.

All commands following @code{WITH} are optional.


@example
ACCEPT @var{variable-1}
   LINE @var{variable-2} | @var{literal-1} COLUMN @var{variable-3} | @var{literal-2}
   WITH
      AUTO-SKIP | AUTO
      BACKGROUND-COLOR @var{variable-4 }| @var{literal-3}
      BELL | BEEP
      BLINK
      FOREGROUND-COLOR @var{variable-5} | @var{literal-4}
      LOWLIGHT | HIGHLIGHT
      PROMPT
      PROTECTED
      SIZE [IS] @var{variable-6} | @var{literal-5}
      UPDATE
   ON EXCEPTION
      @var{exception processing}
   NOT ON EXCEPTION
      @var{normal processing}
END-ACCEPT.
@end example


@subsection LINE
@cindex @code{LINE}

The line number of @var{variable-2} or @var{literal-1} to accept the field.


@subsection COLUMN
@cindex @code{COLUMN}

The column number of @var{variable-3} or @var{literal-2} to accept the field.


@subsection AUTO-SKIP
@cindex @code{AUTO-SKIP}
@cindex @code{AUTO}

The word @code{AUTO} may be used for @code{AUTO-SKIP}.

With this option the @code{ACCEPT} statement returns after the last
character is typed at the end of the field.
This is the same as if the Enter key were pressed.

Without this option the cursor remains at the end of the field
and waits for the user to press Enter.

The Right-Arrow key returns from the end of the field.
The Left-Arrow key returns from the beginning.
@xref{ACCEPT special, Arrow keys,,,}.

The Alt-Right-Arrow and Alt-Left-Arrow keys never @code{AUTO-SKIP}.


@subsection BACKGROUND-COLOR
@cindex @code{BACKGROUND-COLOR}

The background color is the color used behind the characters.

@var{Variable-4} or @var{literal-3} must be numeric.
See file @file{screenio.cpy} for the color assignments to @var{variable-4}
or @var{literal-3}.


@subsection BELL
@cindex @code{BELL}
@cindex @code{BEEP}

The word @code{BEEP} may be used for @code{BELL}.

The system beeps when the cursor moves to accept from this field.
On some systems, there is no sound.
Some other method may indicate a beep, such a flashing screen or pop up window.


@subsection BLINK
@cindex @code{BLINK}

The field blinks while the user enters the data.
This can help small menu selection fields to stand out.


@subsection FOREGROUND-COLOR
@cindex @code{FOREGROUND-COLOR}

The foreground color is the color used for the characters.

@var{Variable-5} or @var{literal-4} must be numeric.
See file @file{screenio.cpy} for the color assignments to @var{variable-5}
or @var{literal-4}.


@subsection LOWLIGHT
@cindex @code{LOWLIGHT}
@cindex @code{HIGHLIGHT}

The @code{LOWLIGHT} and @code{HIGHLIGHT} phrases vary the intensity of the field.

@code{LOWLIGHT} displays with lower intensity
and @code{HIGHLIGHT} displays with higher intensity.
Having neither @code{LOWLIGHT} nor @code{HIGHLIGHT} displays at normal intensity.

These may have different levels of intensity, if at all, depending on the
make and model of the screens.


@subsection PROMPT
@cindex @code{PROMPT}

Display the field with prompt characters as the cursor moves to accept from this field.


@subsection PROTECTED
@cindex @code{PROTECTED}

@code{PROTECTED} is ignored.


@subsection SIZE
@cindex @code{SIZE}

The size of @var{variable-1} to accept from the screen.

@var{Variable-6} or @var{literal-5} must be numeric.

@vtable @option

@item @code{SIZE} <greater than zero>

If @var{variable-6} or @var{literal-5} is less than the length of
@var{variable-1} then only the @code{SIZE} number of characters accept
into the field.
@var{Variable-1} pads with spaces after @code{SIZE} to the end of the field.

If @var{variable-6} or @var{literal-5} is greater than @var{variable-1},
then the screen pads with spaces after @var{variable-1} to the @code{SIZE} length.

@item @code{SIZE ZERO}
@itemx <@code{SIZE} option not specified>

The @var{variable-1} accepts to its field length.

@end vtable


@subsection UPDATE
@cindex @code{UPDATE}

The contents of variable-1 displays on the screen as the @code{ACCEPT} begins.
This allows the user to update the field without having to type it all again.

Without this option, the @code{ACCEPT} field is always blank.


@subsection ON EXCEPTION
@cindex @code{ON EXCEPTION}

Check the special register cob-crt-status for the special key that was pressed.
This includes Escape, Tab, Back-Tab, F-keys, arrows, etc...
See screenio.cpy for the values.


@subsection NOT ON EXCEPTION
@cindex @code{NOT ON EXCEPTION}

Reset any F-key indicator because no special key was pressed.


@node ACCEPT special
@section ACCEPT special keys
@cindex @code{ACCEPT} special keys

Special keys are available for extended @code{ACCEPT} statements.

The @code{COB-CRT-STATUS} values are in the screenio.cpy copy file.


@subsection Arrow keys
@cindex Arrow keys

The Left-Arrow key moves the cursor to the left.
Without @code{AUTO-SKIP} the cursor stops at the beginning of the field.
With @code{AUTO-SKIP} it returns with the @code{COB-SCR-KEY-LEFT} value of 2009.
@xref{Extended ACCEPT, AUTO-SKIP,,,}.

The Alt-Left-Arrow key is the same as Left-Arrow except that
it never returns, even for @code{AUTO-SKIP}.

The Right-Arrow key moves the cursor to the right.
Without @code{AUTO-SKIP} the cursor stops at the end of the field.
With @code{AUTO-SKIP} it returns with the @code{COB-SCR-KEY-RIGHT} value of 2010.
@xref{Extended ACCEPT, AUTO-SKIP,,,}.

The Alt-Right-Arrow key is the same as Right-Arrow except that
it never returns, even for @code{AUTO-SKIP}.


@subsection Backspace key
@cindex Backspace key

The Backspace key moves the cursor, and the remainder of the text, to the left.


@subsection Delete keys
@cindex Delete keys

The Delete key deletes the cursor's character and moves the
remainder of the text to the left.
The cursor does not move.

The Alt-Delete key deletes all text from the cursor to the
end of the field.


@subsection End key
@cindex End key

The End key moves the cursor after the last non-space character.
Pressing the End key again moves the cursor to the end of the field.
Repeated pressing moves the cursor back and forth.


@subsection Home key
@cindex Home key

The Home key moves the cursor to the first non-space character.
Pressing the Home key again moves the cursor to the beginning of the field.
Repeated pressing moves the cursor back and forth.


@subsection Insert key
@cindex Insert key

The Insert key changes the insert mode.

The value of the insert mode is used in all following @code{ACCEPT}
statements while the program is running.

When the insert mode is on, typed characters move the existing characters
to the right until field is full.
When it is off, typed characters type over existing characters.

Note: The insert mode is ignored for fields with a size of 1.

The insert mode can also be changed by the @code{COB_INSERT_MODE} setting at any time,
@pxref{Appendix I, Runtime Configuration, Runtime Configuration}.


@subsection Tab keys
@cindex Tab keys

The Tab key returns from the @code{ACCEPT} with the @code{COB-SCR-TAB} value of 2007.

The Shift-Tab key returns with the @code{COB-SCR-BACK-TAB} value of 2008.


@node Extended DISPLAY
@section Extended DISPLAY statement
@cindex Extended @code{DISPLAY} statement

Extended @code{DISPLAY} statements allow for full control of items that display
on the screen.
Items display by line and column positioning.

@example

DISPLAY @var{variable-1} | @var{literal-1} | @var{figurative constant}
   LINE @var{line} COLUMN @var{column}
   WITH BELL
        BLANK LINE | SCREEN
        ERASE EOL | EOS
        SIZE [IS] @var{variable-2} | @var{literal-2}
END-DISPLAY.

@end example


@subsection BELL
@cindex @code{BELL}

Ring the bell.
It is optional.


@subsection BLANK
@cindex @code{BLANK LINE}
@cindex @code{BLANK SCREEN}

Clear the whole line or screen.
It is optional.

@vtable @option

@item @code{BLANK LINE}

Clear the line from the beginning of the line to the end of the line.

@item @code{BLANK SCREEN}

Clear the whole screen.

@end vtable


@subsection ERASE
@cindex @code{ERASE EOL}
@cindex @code{ERASE EOS}

Clear the line or screen from LINE and COLUMN.
It is optional.

@vtable @option

@item @code{ERASE EOL}

Clear the line from LINE and COLUMN to the end of the line.

@item @code{ERASE EOS}

Clear the screen from LINE and COLUMN to the end of the screen.

@end vtable


@subsection SIZE
@cindex @code{SIZE}

The size of @var{variable-1}, @var{literal-1}, or @var{figurative-constant}
to display onto the screen.
It is optional.

@vtable @option

@item @code{SIZE} @var{positive-integer}

If @code{SIZE} is less than the length of @var{variable-1} or @var{literal-1}
then only the @code{SIZE} number of characters display.

If @code{SIZE} is greater than the length of @var{variable-1} or @var{literal-1},
then the screen pads with spaces after the field to the @code{SIZE} length.

Figurative constants display repeatedly the number of times in @code{SIZE}.
Except that @code{LOW-VALUES} always positions the cursor (see @code{SIZE} ZERO below).

@item @code{SIZE ZERO}
@itemx <@code{SIZE} option not specified>

@var{Variable-1} or @var{literal-1} displays with the field length.

@end vtable


@subsection Figurative Constants
@cindex Figurative Constants

Certain figurative constants and values have special functions.
All other figurative constants display as a single character.

@vtable @option

@item @code{SPACE}
Display spaces from LINE and COLUMN to the end of the screen.
This is the same as WITH ERASE EOS.

@item @code{LOW-VALUE}
Position the cursor to LINE and COLUMN.
The next @code{DISPLAY} statement does not need a LINE or COLUMN
to display at that position.

@item @code{ALL X"01"}
Display spaces from LINE and COLUMN to the end of the line.
This is the same as @code{WITH ERASE EOL}.

@item @code{ALL X"02"}
Clear the whole screen.
This is the same as @code{WITH BLANK SCREEN}.

@item @code{ALL X"07"}
Ring the bell.
This is the same as @code{WITH BELL}.

@end vtable

@node FUNCTION CONTENT-LENGTH
@section CONTENT-LENGTH
@cindex @code{FUNCTION CONTENT-LENGTH}

@code{FUNCTION CONTENT-LENGTH} returns the length of NUL byte terminated data given a pointer:

@example
       identification division.
       program-id. zlen.
       data division.
       working-storage section.
       01 ptr   usage pointer.
       01 str   pic x(4) value z"abc".

      *> Testing CONTENT-LENGTH
       procedure division.

       set ptr to address of str
       display content-length(ptr)

       goback.
       end program hosted.
@end example


@node FUNCTION CONTENT-OF
@section CONTENT-OF
@cindex @code{FUNCTION CONTENT-OF}

@code{FUNCTION CONTENT-OF} returns an alphanumeric field given a pointer and optional length:

Data from pointer is returned as a COBOL field either by scanning for a NUL byte or using the
optional length. Reference modification of result allowed.

@example
       identification division.
       program-id. contents.
       data division.
       working-storage section.
       01 ptr   usage pointer.
       01 str   pic x(4) value z"abc".

      *> Testing CONTENT-OF
       procedure division.

       set ptr to address of str
       display content-of(ptr)
       display content-of(ptr, 2)
       display content-of(ptr)(2:2)

       goback.
       end program hosted.
@end example


@node System Routines, Appendices, Extensions, Top
@chapter System Routines

For a complete list of supported system routines,
@pxref{Appendix D, ,System routines}.

@menu
* CBL_GC_GETOPT::               GETOPT for COBOL
* CBL_GC_HOSTED::               Access to C hosted variables
* CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP::            Sleep for nanoseconds
* CBL_GC_FORK::                 Fork the current COBOL process to a new one
* CBL_GC_WAITPID::              Wait for a system process to end
* CBL_GC_WINDOW::               Multiple Window functions

@end menu

@node CBL_GC_GETOPT
@section CBL_GC_GETOPT

@code{CBL_GC_GETOPT} provides the quite well-known option parser, getopt, for
GnuCOBOL.
The usage of this system routine is described by the following example.

@example
        identification division.
        program-id. prog.

        data division.
        working-storage section.
            78 shortoptions value "jkl".

            01 longoptions.
                05 optionrecord occurs 2 times.
                    10 optionname   pic x(25).
                    10 has-value    pic 9.
                    10 valpoint     pointer value NULL.
                    10 return-value pic x(4).

            01 longind     pic 99.
            01 long-only   pic 9 value 1.

            01 return-char pic x(4).
            01 opt-val     pic x(10).

            01 counter     pic 9 value 0.
@end example

We first need to define the necessary fields for getopt's shortoptions (so),
longoptions (lo), longoption index (longind), long-only-option (long-only)
and also the fields for return values return-char and opt-val (arbitrary size
with trimming, see return codes).

The shortoptions are written down as an alphanumeric field (i.e., a string with
arbitrary size) as follows:

@example
"ab:c::d"
@end example

This means we want getopt to look for shortoptions named a, b, c or d and we demand
an option value for b and we are accepting an optional one for c.

The longoptions are defined as a table of records with oname, has-value, valpoint and val.
@itemize @bullet
@item oname defines the name of a longoption.
@item has-value defines if an option value is demanded (has-val = 1), optional (has-val = 2) or not required (has-val = 0).
@item valpoint is a pointer used to specify an address to save getopt's return value to. The pointer
is optional. If it is @code{NULL}, getopt returns a value as usual. If you use the pointer it has to
point to a @code{PIC X(4)} field.
@item The field val is a @code{PIC X(4)} character which is returned if the longoption was recognized.
@end itemize
The longoption structure is immutable! You can only vary the number of records.

Now we have the tools to run @code{CBL_GC_GETOPT} within the procedure division.

@example
        procedure division.
            move "version" to optionname   (1).
            move 0         to has-value    (1).
            move "v"       to return-value (1).

            move "verbose" to optionname   (2).
            move 0         to has-value    (2).
            move "V"       to return-value (2).

            perform with test after until return-code = -1
                call 'CBL_GC_GETOPT' using
                   by reference shortoptions longoptions longind
                   by value long-only
                   by reference return-char opt-val
                end-call

                display return-char end-display
                display opt-val     end-display
            end-perform
            stop run.

@end example

The example shows how we initialize all parameters and call the routine until
@code{CBL_GC_GETOPT} runs out of options and returns -1.

If the option is recognized, @code{return-char} contains the option character. Otherwise, @code{return-char} will contain one of the following:
@table @code
@item ?
undefined or ambiguous option
@item 1
non-option (only if first byte of so is @samp{-})
@item 0
@code{valpoint != NULL} and we are writing the return value to the specified address
@item -1
no more options (or reached the first non-option if first byte of so is @samp{+})
@end table

@noindent
The return-code of @code{CBL_GC_GETOPT} is one of:

@table @code
@item 1
a non-option (only if first byte of so is @samp{-})
@item 0
@code{valpoint != NULL} and we are writing the return value to the specified address
@item -1
no more options (or reach the first non-option  if first byte of so is @samp{+})
@item 2
truncated option value in opt-val (because opt-val was too small)
@item 3
regular answer from @code{getopt}
@end table


@node CBL_GC_HOSTED
@section CBL_GC_HOSTED

@code{CBL_GC_HOSTED} provides access to the following C hosted variables:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{argc} @ to binary-long by value
@item @code{argv} @ to pointer to char **
@item @code{stdin}, @code{stdout}, @code{stderr} @ to pointer
@item @code{errno} @ giving address of errno in pointer to binary-long, use based for more direct access
@end itemize

and conditional access to the following variables:
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{tzname} @ pointer to pointer to array of two char pointers
@item @code{timezone} @ C long, will be seconds west of UTC
@item @code{daylight} @ C int, will be 1 during daylight savings
@end itemize

System will need to @code{HAVE_TIMEZONE} defined for these to return
anything meaningful.  Attempts made when they are not available return
1 from @code{CBL_GC_HOSTED}.

It returns 0 when match, 1 on failure, case matters as does length,
@code{arg} won't match.

The usage of this system routine is described by the following example.

@example
HOSTED identification division.
       program-id. hosted.
       data division.
       working-storage section.
       01 argc  usage binary-long.
       01 argv  usage pointer.

       01 stdin usage pointer.
       01 stdout usage pointer.
       01 stderr usage pointer.

       01 errno usage pointer.
       01 err   usage binary-long based.

       01 domain usage float-long value 3.0.

       01 tzname usage pointer.
       01 tznames usage pointer based.
          05 tzs usage pointer occurs 2 times.

       01 timezone   usage binary-long.
       01 daylight   usage binary-short.


      *> Testing CBL_GC_HOSTED
       procedure division.
       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stdin "stdin"
       display "stdin                : " stdin
       call "feof" using by value stdin
       display "feof stdin           : " return-code

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stdout "stdout"
       display "stdout               : " stdout
       call "fprintf" using by value stdout by content "Hello" & x"0a"

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using stderr "stderr"
       display "stderr               : " stderr
       call "fprintf" using by value stderr by content "on err" & x"0a"

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argc "argc"
       display "argc                 : " argc

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argv "argv"
       display "argv                 : " argv

       call "args" using by value argc argv

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using errno "errno"
       display "&errno               : " errno
       set address of err to errno
       display "errno                : " err
       call "acos" using by value domain
       display "errno after acos(3.0): " err ", EDOM is 33"

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using argc "arg"
       display "'arg' lookup         : " return-code
       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using null "argc"
       display "null with argc       : " return-code
       display "argc is still        : " argc


       *> the following only returns zero if the system has HAVE_TIMEZONE set

       call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using daylight "daylight "
       display "'timezone' lookup    : " return-code

       if return-code not = 0
          display "system doesn't has timezone"
       else

          display "timezone is          : " timezone

          call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using daylight "daylight "
          display "'daylight' lookup    : " return-code
          display "daylight is          : " daylight

          set environment "TZ" to "PST8PDT"
          call static "tzset" returning omitted on exception continue end-call

          call "CBL_GC_HOSTED" using tzname "tzname"
          display "'tzname' lookup      : " return-code

          *> tzs(1) will point to z"PST" and tzs(2) to z"PDT"
          if return-code equal 0 and tzname not equal null then
              set address of tznames to tzname
              if tzs(1) not equal null then
                 display "tzs #1               : " tzs(1)
              end-if
              if tzs(2) not equal null then
                 display "tzs #2               : " tzs(2)
              end-if
          end-if

       end-if

       goback.
       end program hosted.
@end example


@node CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP
@section CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP

@code{CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP} allows you to pause the program for nanoseconds.
The actual precision depends on the system.

@example
      *> Waiting a half second
       call "CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP" using "500000000" end-call

      *> Waiting five seconds using compiler string catenation for readability
       call "CBL_GC_NANOSLEEP" using "500" & "0000000"  end-call
@end example


@node CBL_GC_FORK
@section CBL_GC_FORK

@code{CBL_GC_FORK} allows you to fork the current COBOL process to a new one.
The current content of the process' storage (including @code{LOCAL-STORAGE})
will be identical, any file handles get invalid in the new process, positions
and file / record locks are only available to the original process.

This system routine is not available on Windows (exception: GCC on Cygwin).

@table @asis
@item Parameters
none

@item Returns
PID (the child process gets @samp{0} returned, the calling process gets
the PID of the created children).
Negative values are returned for system dependent error codes and -1 if the function
is not available on the current system.
@end table

@example
       IDENTIFICATION DIVISION.
       PROGRAM-ID. prog.
       DATA DIVISION.
       WORKING-STORAGE SECTION.
       01 CHILD-PID   PIC S9(9) BINARY.
       01 WAIT-STS    PIC S9(9) BINARY.
       PROCEDURE DIVISION.

           CALL "CBL_GC_FORK" RETURNING CHILD-PID END-CALL
           EVALUATE TRUE
              WHEN CHILD-PID = ZERO
                 PERFORM CHILD-CODE
              WHEN CHILD-PID > ZERO
                 PERFORM PARENT-CODE
              WHEN CHILD-PID = -1
                 DISPLAY 'CBL_GC_FORK is not available '
                         'on the current system!'
                 END-DISPLAY
                 PERFORM CHILD-CODE
                 MOVE 0 TO CHILD-PID
                 PERFORM PARENT-CODE
              WHEN OTHER
                 MULTIPLY CHILD-PID BY -1 END-MULTIPLY
                 DISPLAY 'CBL_GC_FORK returned system error: '
                         CHILD-PID
                 END-DISPLAY
           END-EVALUATE

           STOP RUN.

       CHILD-CODE.
           CALL "C$SLEEP" USING 1 END-CALL
           DISPLAY "Hello, I am the child"
           END-DISPLAY
           MOVE 2 TO RETURN-CODE

           CONTINUE.

       PARENT-CODE.
           DISPLAY "Hello, I am the parent"
           END-DISPLAY
           CALL "CBL_GC_WAITPID" USING CHILD-PID RETURNING WAIT-STS
           END-CALL
           MOVE 0 TO RETURN-CODE
           EVALUATE TRUE
              WHEN WAIT-STS >= 0
                 DISPLAY 'Child ended with status: '
                         WAIT-STS
                 END-DISPLAY
              WHEN WAIT-STS = -1
                 DISPLAY 'CBL_GC_WAITPID is not available '
                         'on the current system!'
                 END-DISPLAY
              WHEN WAIT-STS < -1
                 MULTIPLY -1 BY WAIT-STS END-MULTIPLY
                 DISPLAY 'CBL_GC_WAITPID returned system error: ' WAIT-STS
                 END-DISPLAY
           END-EVALUATE

           CONTINUE.
@end example


@node CBL_GC_WAITPID
@section CBL_GC_WAITPID

@code{CBL_GC_WAITPID} allows you to wait until another system process ended.
Additional you can check the process' return code.

Parameters:	none
Returns:	function-status / child-status
Negative values are returned for system dependent error codes and -1 if the function
is not available on the current system.

@example
        CALL "CBL_GC_WAITPID" USING CHILD-PID RETURNING WAIT-STS
        END-CALL
        MOVE 0 TO RETURN-CODE
        DISPLAY 'CBL_GC_WAITPID ended with status: ' WAIT-STS
        END-DISPLAY
@end example


@node CBL_GC_WINDOW
@section CBL_GC_WINDOW

@code{CBL_GC_WINDOW} allows you to create, move, hide, show, top, bottom 
or list multiple windows if your installation supports CURSES & PANELS. 
Note windows have depth like a stack of cards on a flat table. Each window
has its contents independent of any other window. All of the writes to
the console are directed to the window on top of the deck of windows.

Parameters: the gcwindow.cpy copy member defines all parameters for this
function. All commands but the the LIST command uses the same secondary
parameter @code{WP-WINDOW-PARMS}, the LIST command uses @code{WL-WINDOW-LIST} instead.

TODO explain the parameters

Returns: COBOL RETURN-CODE contains general error code (like not available
PANEL function in the curses runtime library) and specific problems depending
on the parameters, zero means "no error".
You can use @code{RETURNING WP-WINDOW-RETURN-CODE} to use the condition-names
for more detailed error handling, otherwise use those as reference.

@example
        TODO
@end example

@node Appendices

@menu
* Appendix A::                  Compiler @command{cobc} options
* Appendix B::                  Reserved Words
* Appendix C::                  Intrinsic Functions
* Appendix D::                  System routines
* Appendix E::                  System names
* Appendix F::                  Exception names
* Appendix G::                  Compiler Configuration
* Appendix H::                  Module loader @command{cobcrun} options
* Appendix I::                  Runtime configuration
* Appendix J::                  GNU Free Documentation License
@end menu

@node Appendix A, Appendix B, Appendices, Appendices
@appendix Compiler @command{cobc} options

The following list of options was extracted from
@code{cobc --help} and shows all available compiler options
with a short description.

@include cbhelp.tex

@node Appendix B, Appendix C, Appendix A, Appendices
@appendix Reserved Words

The following list of reserved words was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-reserved} and shows the reserved words, an implementation

@strong{Please notice:} This list is highly specific to the option
@option{-std=@var{dialect}} and reserved word options
(@option{-freserved=@var{word}}, @option{-fno-reserved=@var{word}}) in effect.
You can get the list for a given @var{dialect} by calling
@code{cobc -std=@var{dialect} --list-reserved}.

@include cbrese.tex

@node Appendix C, Appendix D, Appendix B, Appendices
@appendix Intrinsic Functions

The following list of intrinsic functions was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-intrinsics} and shows the names of the available
functions, an implementation note and the number of parameters.

@include cbintr.tex

@node Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix C, Appendices
@appendix System routines

The following list of system routines was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-system} and shows the names of the available
system routines along with the number of parameters.

@include cbsyst.tex

@node Appendix E, Appendix F, Appendix D, Appendices
@appendix System names

The following list of system names was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-mnemonics} and shows the system names categorized
by their type.

@include cbmnem.tex

@node Appendix F, Appendix G, Appendix E, Appendices
@appendix Exception names

The following list of exception names was extracted from
@code{cobc --list-exceptions} and shows the exception names and
if those are fatal (lead to a program abort).

All of those can be activated and deactivated, both directly and
at group level, using @option{-fec}.

@include cbexceptions.tex

@node Appendix G, Appendix H, Appendix F, Appendices
@appendix Compiler Configuration

The following list was extracted from @file{config/default.conf}.

@verbatiminclude cbconf.tex

@node Appendix H, Appendix I, Appendix G, Appendices
@appendix Module loader @command{cobcrun} options

The following list of options was extracted from
@code{cobcrun --help} and shows all available options
for the module loader with a short description.

@include cbchelp.tex

@node Appendix I, Appendix J, Appendix H, Appendices
@appendix Runtime configuration

The following list was extracted from @file{config/runtime.cfg}.

@include cbrunt.tex

@comment The full FDL 1.3 text
@node Appendix J, , Appendix I, Appendices
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@cindex Copying

@include fdl.texi


@ignore
@comment Create index.
@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp
@end ignore

@comment End info file.
@bye

@c Local Variables:
@c mode:outline-minor
@c outline-regexp:"@\\(ch\\|sec\\|subs\\)"
@c compile-command:"texi2any --pdf -o gnucobol.pdf gnucobol.texi"
@c End:
